these memes, which are all terrible by
the way, where it's like one to four
reps is for strength and four to eight
reps is for uh size and strength and
then, you know, 10 to 15 is for muscle
side. Yeah. None of that's true.
Basically, your muscle does
one thing. It gets stronger. And when it
gets stronger, the motor units become
thicker. the actin and meiosin becomes
becomes like physically thicker which
gives you a greater circumference of
musculature. So the only thing that's
that's going on is you're getting
stronger. You either have an efficient
path to create this effect or you have a
totally inefficient path to create this
effect.
[music]
Hi, my name is John Jish. I'm a doctor
of biomedical engineering which gives me
a unique perspective beyond what a lot
of sports performance guys see when they
read academic literature and make
observations about sports performance.
Today I want to talk about something a
little bit different. I've really gone
over how many sets you want to do. I've
beat that subject to death and I did it
for a reason because ultimately
you can get all of the stimulus into one
set if you have a strategy like variable
resistance to get the greatest amount of
work done through the musculature that
whatever you're targeting in the
shortest possible period of time. So, I
want to add some stuff to that
discussion, but also people ask the
question, well, how many reps? Like, is
there is there some magic to going like
one or four reps? And you see like a
breakdown sometimes and like these
memes, which are all terrible by the
way, where it's like one to four reps is
for strength and four to eight reps is
for uh size and strength and then, you
know, 10 to 15 is for muscle size. Yeah,
none of that's true. Basically, your
muscle does
one thing. It gets stronger. And when it
gets stronger, the motor units become
thicker. The actin and meiosin becomes
becomes like physically thicker, which
gives you a greater circumference of
musculature. So, the only thing that's
that's going on is you're getting
stronger. You either have an efficient
path to create this effect or you have a
totally inefficient path to create this
effect. But that the qu now the question
is what about reps? So I want to talk a
little bit about the henman size
principle. So what this states is that
motor units are recruited based on
difficulty. So you know if I if I pick
up this cup of coffee like is my bicep
contracting? Yeah. Uh is it is it going
to fatigue? Is am I recruiting the
larger motor units? So the the henman
size principle says as you recruit more
muscle
the size of the motor unit that's
getting recruited becomes larger and
larger and larger. So basically the
large motor units that you have the most
powerful
actuators inside the muscle are saved
for when you're really doing something
where fatigue is is happening. You're
losing velocity. So, a lot of that has
to do with mechanical tension because
like I said, I could I could lift this
cup of coffee all day. I'm not going to
go to fatigue in my bicep. Now, then the
question I I think the Henman size
principle has been misread in the past
to think like, okay, I just need to go
like super low reps, super heavy weight.
Eh, that's not quite true because and
and we have other research showing that
you can go between five and 30
repetitions and get the same effect
because if you're going even if you're
going to 30 repetitions and you've
picked a lower weight by the time you
get to that 30th repetition, you've
accumulated a lot of mechanical tension
and a lot of exhaustion. you are calling
upon those larger motor units if you
truly are going to fatigue. Now,
variable resistance helps you go to
fatigue. When you're holding a weight,
your subconscious will basically to a
degree stop you. It's a process called
neural inhibition. But when like if I'm
doing a bicep curl, I might be holding
300 lb here, 150 here, and you know,
maybe 100 down at the bottom. So I can
go through that range of motion and
diminish the range so that my last
couple repetitions are much shorter. Now
still I I still haven't answered the
question. We see the same results with
five to 30 repetitions. So how do you
decide what repetition you go to? That's
where the literature becomes a little
foggy because
ultimately I want to accumulate the most
mechanical tension in the muscle.
But I also have to keep in mind the
higher the repetitions
cross referenced with a larger muscle,
like if I'm going 30 reps with
deadlifts, that's going to be more of a
cardiac stimulus than a muscular
stimulus because I'm just going to run
out of like oxygenated blood to, you
know, before that process gets finished.
Now, Mike Mener said something and, you
know, I I'm a fan of Mike Mener. his
principles were. I I think for any one
person, him and Arthur Jones, I kind of
judge them together because they work
together, but ultimately I think they
pushed knowledge uh especially practical
knowledge of weight training and just
training stimulus and response in
general more than any two people really
ever. Unfortunately, they did not have
the benefit of the amount of literature
that I have because since they were
doing this in the 1970s,
uh, a lot of studies have been done.
They always had the opinion that because
you're walking around on your lower body
muscles, uh, and giving them nominal
contraction all the time that you really
want to go high reps
with lower extremities, not so much with
upper extremities. I can create an
argument to reverse that. To be honest,
we still don't know what's right. But
ultimately,
I think this is what you got to stick
with. You can go higher reps. Like,
let's say with certain lift, like right
now, I'm doing u the Paraporce bands,
Parapforce
um the 41inch bands, and I'm doing the
black and the light gray together. So,
I'm doing however many repetitions I'm
doing. As I accumulate
fatigue, the reps are getting shorter
and shorter and shorter. Now, when I
started doing that, uh you guys, there's
a piece of B-roll that keeps recurring.
Uh that was the last time I was in
Mexico, and I did that for 12 reps. Some
of those were partials, so maybe like 10
full reps and and two partials. Now I'm
up to 24 reps and five partials with
that same band setup. So this was 6
months ago when I got back from Mexico.
So that's an incredible amount of
strength that I've gained and I'm
getting stronger in every single
workout. But I'm going to get to the
point where as I'm closing in on 30
repetitions,
am I out of breath or is it really
musculature? Now, when it comes to
training chest, you know, what what's
what's involved in the chest press? So,
pectorals, deltoid, tricep, those are
small muscles by comparison to the
quads. So, is that going to be as big of
a deal? Probably not. But if I'm
training legs, do I want to do 30
repetition squats? No. Because that just
becomes a cardiovascular experience at
that point. I'm arguing the opposite of
what Mike said and Arthur Jones that you
you really want to go lower reps on the
lower extremities to the point where you
make sure that your fatigue is muscular
and not cardiovascular. So that's going
to be different for everybody. And the
amount of muscular size you have is
going to alter that. So the the larger
your quads become like for example I I'
I've given this I've given this example
before. I was with a guy uh that I used
to work with at uh the Munich airport.
And the Munich airport is like the land
of stairs. Like you have to run up and
down the stairs between German
immigration and then rechecking your
bags. And you got to run downstairs and
go through uh customs again in Germany.
And then and so I I'm with I'm with a
guy that was working with me and we were
running up and down these stairs and I'm
out of breath and he's not. He's a
really slim guy and he says, "Oh, your
cardio is terrible." And I said, "No,
that's that's not that's not what's
going on. It's my quads are bigger than
yours are. So they draw more blood. So,
it's like somebody with giant quads is
never going to be a great marathon
runner because that's going to draw so
much blood it's going to exhaust them.
That that in itself and this is also
part of why I think sometimes strength
athletes get accused of having poor
cardiovascular endurance where they
actually have better cardiovascular
endurance than everybody. They just have
a bigger engine. So that bigger engine
is going to draw more fuel and it is
going to create exhaustion faster.
Doesn't mean they're out of shape. In
fact, their heart is statistically much
healthier than that of a distance runner
or an endurance type athlete, but it
just doesn't manifest based on how many
miles they can run because of the size
of musculature. So, my advice,
what you want to do is when you find a
setup where you're getting, you know,
let's say 10 repetitions or even even
less than that, uh let's say six or I
don't want to go down to five because
then with variable resistance now you're
dealing with some crazy weights. But,
you know, ultimately you're doing
however many repetitions you're doing.
Keep that same setup because now you've
changed no variables from workout to
workout. So, with the same setup, like I
said, the last six months I've been
using the light gray band and the black
band, and that's my chest press. And I
do, you know, like one set on one day,
and then later on in the week, I do my
second set. So, I only do two sets in
the whole week for my chest. And I get
stronger every single time I do it. But
it's because I'm making sure that it's
progressive overload. like I'm I'm going
for more than I've ever done before. And
I'm not at the point yet where I feel
like my my ability to keep my breath and
and uh blood into the muscle is the
limiting factor. As soon as that
happens, I got to change the setup. I
got to go to some heavier banding. So,
uh I hope that helped. Just make sure
it's the muscle going to fatigue,
[music]
not your heart. Give me a comment. Uh,
and if you have any questions that have
to do with other research, please cite
the research. I'll see you on the next
one. If this video helped you, I want
you to subscribe and follow. I'm going
to put out videos on a regular basis. I
think they're going to help a whole lot
of people, especially if you're one of
those people that doesn't just instantly
grow from lifting regular weights. We've
got the answer for you.